---
layout: post
title: "Gnome Shell"
date: 2011-11-11 18:53
comments: true
categories:
---
I was never a huge fan of Gnome pre-Shell,
preferring any of XFCE for the resource utilization, KDE for the robust
feature set and more attractive UI and especially Windows, which I think
is still the one to beat (take that, OS X!). After just two days of use,
I'm convinced Gnome Shell changes all that. After hearing talk of
"Activities", I went in expecting needless complexity and found instead
a UI that manages to reduce all of the cruft that's accumulated over
years of GUI development into a focused, minimal experience while
improving functionality and aesthetics. After just a week with Gnome
3.2, I'm totally sold.

It's important to note that from a strict functionality perspective,
Gnome Shell doesn't break any new ground. There are no totally new UI
paradigms, just some of the best ideas in desktop UI -- Expose, Aero
Snap, multiple desktops, search -- brought together as a cohesive whole.
The key breakthrough, if such it can be called, of Gnome Shell is that
instead of launching each of these pieces of UI separately, the
Activities view launches them all at once. It's actually quite
brilliant.  This cohesive design makes for a rather minimal experience
-- so minimal that Activities is almost the only piece of UI, which has
one remarkable benefit: you can't go to the wrong menu or hit the wrong
key because it simply isn't there. If you're working in an application
and you want to switch to something else, what you need to do is hit the
Activities key. Need to switch to a different Window? Hit the Activities
key. Need to open a new application? Hit the Activities key. Need to do
a quick Google search? Hit the Activities key. There's more, but I'm
sure you get it. For as long as we've had desktop UI, it's almost
mind-boggling that someone didn't come up with this earlier.

One drawback is that I found myself spending my first day with Gnome
Shell actively looking for other UI components because there's a
constant feeling of "this can't be all there is." But, for the most
part, what you see is what you get. One notable exception is the system
shutdown menu item which requires a special keypress to reveal. I ended
up having to search Google before I could shut down my machine, which is
weird.

System configuration is probably the one place where the minimalist
approach fails. I'm not sure if the system settings application is the
end process of some design goal or merely a work in progress, but either
way it's lacking. I had to install a 3rd party application to change
some horrible font defaults and I still haven't found a way to make web
searches default to Google instead of Wikpedia. Still, even if Gnome's
designers decide not to support more advanced configuration options, I
think it's inevitable that the 3rd party tools will get better and
mitigate the need for official support. I mean, it is still Linux,
right?

The next big thing in desktop environments is obviously going to be
touch UI and, of course, how touch and mouse and keyboard will coexist
and Gnome Shell is clearly designed with this in mind. Microsoft has
also revealed their hand with Windows 8, which will essentially be two
different experiences in one: a touch-friendly Metro experience
alongside the traditional Windows desktop. In contrast, the Gnome team
is solving this problem by redesigning individual applications for
full-screen touch UI, the first of which are expected in 3.4. The
crucial difference is that with Gnome's approach, non-touch
applications, like, say, Gimp, will inhabit the same space as touch
apps.

Based on what I've seen of both approaches, I think Gnome will get there
first. Because of the focus on individual applications they neatly avoid
the problem of unifying the touch and non-touch experiences. There's a
cost though, in that Microsoft's touch experience is shaping up to be
really first rate, which I think is possible precisely because they are
separating it out from the traditional desktop. With Gnome, I get a
sense that touch will be supported, but not necessarily catered to.
Ultimately, the jury's out on what kind of support for touch Gnome will
have and how that'll affect the overall experience, but I'm certainly
paying attention.

Honestly, this is the first time the design of an open source project
has really wowed me. Gnome might not win any OS X converts with Shell
but it's about time there's a UI on Linux that's good instead of good
enough.

