---
layout: post
title: "Words for Friends"
date: 2012-02-16 21:14
comments: true
categories: 
---
I've been playing some Words with Friends with my family. I don't love
the game, but I do like that my whole family's playing it, especially
because we're spread out across the country.  For the uninitiated, Words
with Friends is asynchronous Scrabble. I get a message on my phone every
time it's my turn, so I don't have to pay attention to the game. That's
nice.

So Tuesday was Valentine's Day and that morning I got a "your move"
message from Words with Friends. It was a nice holiday-themed message,
too: Janmalley made a move on you (in Words, of course!). There was a
little heart at the end of the message.

{% img /images/words-with-friends.png %}

To be clear, Janmalley is my mother.  Now there are people out there,
I'm sure, who would find the unintentional connotation amusing. Oedipus
jokes would ensue. I'm not one of those people. I found the whole thing
pretty distasteful.

Look, I get it. Words with Friends is a game. It's supposed to be fun
and light-hearted. And Valentine's Day is a fun, light-hearted holiday.
I'm not deleting the app or writing a nasty-gram to Zynga, but when I
get a message telling me that my own mother has made a move on me, I
don't think it's cute and fun. I just think the app sending it is dumb,
just a brainless piece of software. It doesn't understand me, my mother
or why we might be playing a game together in the first place. That, in
a nutshell, is the problem with all of these social graph applications:
they're really great at navigating links between people and really
terrible at understanding those links.

Words with Friends is so-called precisely because Zynga doesn't have a
clue who you're playing it with.  This is because it's modeled after
Facebook, which in turn, only understands one type of connection: the
friend. Yes, the friend, that same relationship we've been modeling
since Friendster continues to be the base unit of social. To be fair,
it's not like there's been no evolution at all in the last ten years.
Facebook now lets you decorate your friend links with some metadata
denoting a family, colleague or classmate relation, but that doesn't
change the fact that you still have to be someone's friend before you
can be their colleague.  Of course, as is obvious to anyone that's ever
had a job, the world doesn't work that way.  And online, your colleagues
should not have default access to the same personal information your
friends or family do.  That's silly.

So the real problem with this model isn't so much that I get ridiculous
messages from Words with Friends on Valentine's Day, but that the dumb
friend graph severely limits the kinds of applications we can build and
the overall usefulness of the service in all sorts of ways ranging from
automatically filtering stories in my feed to setting sane privacy
defaults. To be fair, this is not an easy problem to solve. The friend
link has persisted because it's easy to implement, users understand it
and it avoids a some tough problems (what if you and I don't agree about
our relationship?).

Google+ did a neat thing with circles, eschewing the concept of
friendship entirely and opting for arbitrary user-defined categories.
Circles fixes a lot of problems with the dumb friend graph.  Facebook
has something similar with groups and Twitter has lists. The problem
with all of these is that (a) they don't define relationships and (b)
even if they did, the categorizations are arbitrary and thus not able to
be leveraged.

For example, I have a dedicated G+ circle where I put all the people I
don't want to connect with but am afraid of rejecting.  Don't worry,
you're not in it.  I named this group the 9th Circle because it wasn't
immediately obvious to me what such a group of people should be called
and I thought I was being clever.  The name works.  Even if I somehow
forgot what the intended purpose of the grouping was, the name itself
signifies to me some level of danger.  To me.  To a social graph app,
it's meaningless.  No one is going to release Words with the 9th Circle
anytime soon.

So if the "friend" relationship is big and dumb and arbitrary
categorizations can't be meaningfully leveraged, what's next? To be
honest, I'm not sure, but I can't help but feel that the social graph
people should start paying more attention to the microformats community.
Just look at all [these](http://microformats.org/wiki/existing-rel-values) awesome relationship descriptors! How does Words with Neighbors sound to you? Words with Muses?

Unfortunately, adopting a relationship descriptor standard is the easy
part. Converting said descriptors into something that's intuitive, safe
(yes, safe) and useful for users is no small job. In the same way that
the web standards thing finally happened, I think that this kind of
standardized metadata for our relationships is the future, but it's not
at all clear to me how we'll get there.
